Up to this point, we have
focused on optimizing our
temperature simulation by
cutting out unnecessary reads
and writes, ultimately harnessing
the GPU's massive parallelism.
Now let's take a quick look at the
overall structure of our simulator.
Here we initialize a PREV
buffer and a NEXT buffer, store
data on disk, and then perform
several simulation steps in a loop.
Everything seems straightforward
except for one puzzling detail.
Each time we store the data,
our next computations slow
down, sometimes by a factor of 100.
That's a massive performance
drop, and it suggests something
else is at play besides our fancy
iterators or algorithm design.
This hints at a deeper concern
related to memory spaces.
Recall our illustration regarding
the bandwidth differences
between CPUs and GPUs.
GPUs can handle much higher
data throughput because they
have their own dedicated memory
that is specifically architected
for massive bandwidth.
Previously, we distinguished host
and device execution spaces to know
where code actually was running.
To get better performance,
we also have to distinguish
host and device memory spaces.
In other words, where the
bytes of data live.
But that raises a question.
How did our simulator run on
the GPU in the first place?
We haven't done anything special
to allocate device memory, have we?
Well, we sort of did.
Earlier, we switched from STD
vector to thrust universal vector.
This container uses managed memory.
A technology that makes the CPU and
GPU seem to share the same memory.
Under the hood, though,
the CPU and GPU still have
separate memory spaces.
Whenever the CPU or GPU
accesses data, CUDA silently
transfers the data to the
location where it's needed.
In effect, a universal vector.
CUDA keeps two copies of the
same data, one for the CPU
and one for the GPU.
If the CPU reads or writes to
the vector, CUDA invalidates
the GPU copy and vice versa.
This saves us from writing
explicit copy calls, but it
also has a performance cost.
Let's go back to our sudden
slowdown and see how this
hidden data transfer explains
performance Aggression.
Imagine the data is in the
device memory when we call
a store on the CPU.
Because the CPU needs the
data, CUDA first copies it
from the device to the host memory.
Once store finishes, we launch
the next GPU computation step.
But now the host copy is valid,
while the GPU copy is out
of date, so CUDA has to copy
the data back to the device.
That's why the first simulation
step after storing takes so long.
It includes the hidden cost of
moving data back onto the GPU.
To solve our performance problem,
we can make this GPU and CPU
transfers explicit.
Thrust offers different containers
so you can decide where your
data should live.
Thrust host vector allocates
host memory space, so
it's only accessible in
the host execution space.
Thrust device vector allocates
device memory space, so
it's only accessible in
the device execution space.
It's important to note that
both vectors have to be
constructed on the host.
Anyways, by choosing the
right container, we avoid
the hidden back and forth
transfers of managed memory.
That way, we only move data across
the CPU-GPU boundary when we decide
it's necessary, which helps keep
the performance more predictable.
We can handle the data transfers
ourselves by using thrust copy.
which has the same interface as
the standard library's STD copy.
This way, we know exactly
when data is crossing the
CPU-GPU boundary, and we can
control it for optimal performance.
Now we come to our
exercise in this section.
This time, we'll move away
from universal vector, and
instead use separate device
and host containers.
You'll need to allocate a
host vector to hold the copy
of data for CPU space.
And use thrust copy to transfer
that between the device
and host as needed.